Software 0.30 base PR (#1041)
astronomer/docs: software_versioned_docs/version-0.29/access-airflow-database.md

---
sidebar_label: 'Access the Airflow database'
title: 'Access the Airflow database'
id: access-airflow-database
description: Access Airflow's Postgres metadata database on Astronomer Software.

---

> On Astronomer, each Airflow deployment is equipped with a PostgreSQL database that serves as Airflow's underlying metadata database and the scheduler's source of truth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Astronomer, each Airflow deployment includes a PostgreSQL database that serves as the underlying metadata database and the scheduler's source of truth for Airflow.
```

> On Astronomer Software, a Postgres metadata database will be created for each individual Airflow Deployment and hosted within your wider platform database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Astronomer Software, a Postgres metadata database is created for each individual Airflow Deployment and is hosted within your wider platform database.
```

> This guide will cover guidelines for the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This topic provides the following information:
```

> - Risks associated with and use cases for database Access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Risks associated with and use cases for database access.
```

> - Access to Airflow's database in local development

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How to access the  Airflow database in local development.
```

> - Decode Astronomer's metadata Secret

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How to decode the Astronomer metadata secret.
```

> - Access to Airflow's database on Astronomer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How to access the Airflow database on Astronomer.
```

> - Example DAG that incorporates a query to the database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How to implement a sample DAG that queries the database.
```

> > **Note:** Airflow's "Ad-Hoc Query" feature used to be a common way to test DB connections and query the Airflow metadata database via the Airflow UI but was deprecated in 1.10 for security reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** The Airflow "Ad-Hoc Query" feature was deprecated in version 1.10.
```

### Risk associated with database access

> As noted above, every Airflow Deployment's metadata database on Astronomer is hosted within the Platform database your team initiated during the install process for Astronomer Software. Given its importance to the scheduler's performance, it's worth noting the risks associated with accessing Airflow's database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every Airflow Deployment metadata database on Astronomer is hosted within the Platform database you initiated during the Astronomer Software installation process. Given its importance to scheduler performance, it's important that you understand the risks associated with accessing the Airflow database.
```

> We strongly recommend users do not write to the database directly as it can compromise both the integrity of your Airflow Deployment and both of our team's ability to support a user in the case of an issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astronomer recommends that you avoid writing to the database directly as it can compromise the integrity of your Airflow Deployment and it can make it more challenging for Astronomer Support to resolve issues.
```

### Use cases

> Keeping the above risk in mind, pulling from and reading the database safely can be a great way to gather metadata from your Airflow Deployment that isn't otherwise exposed on Astronomer and Airflow (yet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pulling from and reading the database safely can be a great way to gather metadata from your Airflow Deployment that isn't otherwise exposed on Astronomer and Airflow.
```

A few examples of what you can query for:
- Completed Task Count
- Tasks started per hour, per week
- Task duration

> Read below for DB access guidelines both locally and on Astronomer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read below for DB access guidelines both locally and on Astronomer.
```
Remove

> Read below for DB access guidelines both locally and on Astronomer.

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Local access to the Airflow database

To successfully query from your Airflow Deployment's database, you'll need to set up your local Postgres connection.

> **1. Find the `airflow_db` connection Object**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the Airflow UI, go to **Admin**` > `**Connections** and then select the `airflow_db` connection.
```

> On the Airflow UI, navigate over to `Admin` > `Connections`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the Airflow UI, navigate over to `Admin` > `Connections`.
```
Remove

> The `airflow_db` connection is generated by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `airflow_db` connection is generated by default.
```
Remove

![Connections Page](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/docs/query-postgres/query-postgres-connection-page.png)

> **2. Edit the connection**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Edit the following connection settings:
```

> In the `airflow_db` connection object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `airflow_db` connection object:
```
Remove

- Change the `Conn Type` to `Postgres`
- Add the following connection information:

    ```
    host: postgres
    schema: postgres
    login: postgres
    password: postgres
    port (optional): 5432
    ```

> Your connection should look something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your connection should appear similar to the following
```

![Local Connections Details Page](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/docs/query-postgres/query-postgres-connection-details.png)

The port will be set to 5432 by default but if you’ve set a custom port, you’ll need to update that here as well.

> **3. Connect to `airflow_db` in your DAG**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Add the following to your DAG to connect it to `airflow_db`:
```

Here's an example DAG, where `postgres_conn_id` is set to `airflow_db`:

```python
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.operators.python import PythonOperator
from airflow.providers.postgres.hooks.postgres import PostgresHook
from datetime import datetime, timedelta

def get_dag_ids():
    postgres_hook = PostgresHook(postgres_conn_id="airflow_db")
    records = postgres_hook.get_records(sql="select dag_id from dag")
    print(records)

with DAG(
    "connect_dag",
    start_date=datetime(2019, 1, 1),
    max_active_runs=1,
    schedule_interval=None,
    # catchup=False # enable if you don't want historical dag runs to run
) as dag:

    t1 = PythonOperator(
        task_id="get_dag_nums",
        python_callable=get_dag_ids,
    )
```

> Here, the task above grabs all `dag_ids` stored inside `dag` table within Airflow's metadata database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the task pulls all `dag_ids` from the `dag` table in the Airflow metadata database.
```

### Connect to the DB using a PostgreSQL client

> With the connection information above, you should also be able to connect to the Airflow database from any PostgreSQL client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the connection information above, you should also be able to connect to the Airflow database from any PostgreSQL client.
```

Remove

> Using [`psql`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.3/app-psql.html), a terminal-based front-end to PostgreSQL, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open [`psql`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.3/app-psql.html), a terminal-based front-end to PostgreSQL and then run:
```

```
psql -h localhost -U postgres -p 5432 -W
```

When prompted, enter the password from the Connection Object above to access the database.

> Alternatively, you can also connect to the DB via the Postgres container itself by exec-ing into it and executing the `psql` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use the Postgres container to connect to the database by exec-ing into it and then running the `psql` command.
```

> To do so, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, run:
```
Remove
